Introduction to Sequalize ORM for Node.js (#1956)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: articles/introduction-to-sequalize-orm-for-nodejs/index.md

### Introduction to Sequalize ORM for Node.js
![hero image](/engineering-education/introduction-to-sequalize-orm-for-nodejs/hero.jpg)

### Introduction

> In this article we will have an introductory on SQL database basics, a deep look into Object Relational Mappers, their types, and why one should choose Sequalize over any other existing ORMs with Node.js support, an outlook of what Sequalize is, its basic setup. We will not dive into though into how Sequalize ORM integrates with a Nodejs application. Let us save that for a future tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, we will learn about SQL database basics, have a deep look into Object Relational Mappers (ORM), their types, and why one should choose Sequalize over any other existing ORMs with Node.js support, an outlook of what Sequalize is, its basic setup.

We will not dive into though into how Sequalize ORM integrates with a Node.js application. Let us save that for a future tutorial.
```

> 

Reviewer: If possible, add a `Table of contents` section

> ### Prerequisites

Reviewer: Before we talk about installation prerequisites, tell about the conceptual prerequisites. Like what concepts would enable the readers to understand this article better.

Example,
A good understanding about MySQL.

> We first set up a new npm package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We first set up a new npm package as shown below:
```

```bash
npm init -y
```

> We then install Sequalize:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We then install Sequalize as shown below:
```

SQL enables us to perform operations abbreviated as `CRUD`; Create Read Update and Delete. To illustrate this we have two tables in our database `Employees`:

Table `lego_people`

|name   |age    |
|-----  |----   |
|james  |34     |
|craig  |15     |
|paul   |67     |
|cynthia|55     |

Table `lego_height`

|name   |cm     |
|-----  |----   |
|james  | 4     |
|craig  | 5     |
|paul   | 7     |
|cynthia| 5     |

So if we want to `create` data in the `lego_people` table we:

```sql
INSERT INTO lego_people(name, age)
VALUES ('Joe' ,12);
```
The `INSERT INTO` statement is used to create data in a database table. We pass in `name` and `age` as arguments to specify the properties we want to add.
To `read` value from the `lego_people` table:

```sql
SELECT name FROM lego_people;
```
The `name` represents the column name in the` lego_people` table. The `SELECT` statement is used to read data from the database.

To `update` a record in the `lego_height` table by making Paul 8cm tall:

```sql
UPDATE lego_height
SET name = 'paul', height = 8;
```

> We can also perform a `delete` operation from the database for example lets delete Paul altogether:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also perform a `delete` operation from the database. For example, let's delete `paul` altogether using the following command:
```

Reviewer: For variables, constants or unique names, always use ` `` `.

And, in query you had `paul`. So, modified `Paul` as `paul`

Most times we encounter scenarios where we have to write complex SQL query statements to perform CRUD operations from a database. Worse enough, we still need to convert data from the database into an object that is compatible with our language of choice as we will see in the next chapter. It additionally simplifies the manipulation of database engines whenever the need arises. 

So how does ORMs work, well first, choosing the right database you want to use. Then decide on the Object Relational Mapper that would work efficiently with the database and install it. For our case since we're using Node.js, we'll consider Sequalize.
Second, we create a database model. This represents the structure of our database. Database models provide the advantage of scalability and efficiency. The structure defined in the model includes tables, database collection, and columns. We then connect our database.

The types of Object Relational Mappers with Node.js support are:
* `Sequalize` which has support for PostgreSQL, MySQL, MariaDB, SQLite, and Microsoft SQL Server databases.
* `Caminte` supports a large number of databases such as MySQL Sqlite3, Riak, Postgres, CouchDB, MongoDB, Redis. 

> * `Node-ORM` has support for MySQL, SQLite, and PostgreSQL.

Reviewer: Replace `*` with `-` for bullet points

For more on ORMs, you can check out this [documentation](https://www.npmjs.com/search?q=object%20relational%20mapper).

### What is Sequalize
Sequalize is an open-source Node.js module that enables JavaScript developers to work with relational databases more easily including but not limited to MySQL and Postgres. Chances are that if you're working with relational databases already you are doing something like this:

```javascript
CREATE TABLE articles(
    id          INT AUTO_INCREMENT,
    title       NVARCHAR(100) NOT NULL,
    body        NVARCHAR(100) NOT NULL,
    submittedAt DATETIME      NOT NULL
);

const mysql = require("mysql");
const connection = mysql.createConnection({
    host: "localhost",
    user: "root",
    password: "",
    database: "demo_schema"
});
connection.connect();

const query = "SELECT `id`, `title`, `content`, `submittedAt` \
FROM 'articles' WHERE `articles`.`id` = ?";
connection.query(query, 5, function(error, article){
    console.log(article);

> });

Reviewer: Add comments

```

First, you're writing a separate script to create tables and define associations between them, then you're embedding SQL queries in your JavaScript and using a low-level adapter to execute those queries against your database in this case we're using the MySQL node module. Whilst this code in itself isn't terrible, you'll find over time having separate scripts to create your table adds unnecessary friction, also mixing SQL and JavaScript like in this case is not sustainable.

JavaScript does not support multiline strings very well, for instance in our case we're ending the first line of the string with a backslash. Even if it did support it, switching between JavaScript and SQL is just unpleasant. This contributes to a lot of junk code and little business logic which are not easy to maintain.

On the other hand, using sequalize you can avoid writing SQL queries altogether. Let's have a look at this code snippet:

> ```javascript

Reviewer: Add comments

```javascript
const Sequalize = require('sequalize');

const connection = new Sequalize("db name", "username", "password");
const Article = connection.define("article", {
    title: Sequalize.String,
    content: Sequalize.String
});
connection.sync();

Article.findById(5).then(function (article) {
    console.log(article);
})
```

Using Sequalize helps us have less craft, less boilerplate ultimately making your code easy to read, maintain and extend.

### Benefits of Sequalize
So to conclude this introduction we're going to touch on the benefits of Sequalize and Object Relational Mappers in general.
* Sequalize allow us to write less  
* Enable us to write more consistent code
* You can mostly avoid SQL queries
* Sequalize abstract the database engine

> * Good tooling for migrations

Reviewer: Replace `-`

### Introduction to Sequelize ORM for Node.js
![hero image](hero.jpg)

### Introduction

> Connecting an Object-relational Mapper to a Node.js application is not an easy task for most developers since there are no better elaborate resources and documentation about it. If you're one, then this article is for you. It also covers SQL basics so beginners in databases will find it insightful. We will not dive though into how Sequelize ORM integrates with a Nodejs application. Let us save that for a future tutorial.

Reviewer: Before we directly jump into ORM for Node.js, we could start with what is `Sequelization`, then what is `ORM`, and what is the use of connecting ORM with Node.js

So, make sure to elaborate your intro.

|Table of Content           |
|-------------------------  |
|Prerequisites              |
|SQL database basics        |
|Object Relational Mappers  |

> |Sequalize                  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Sequelize                  |
```

> |Table of Content           |
> |-------------------------  |
> |Prerequisites              |
> |SQL database basics        |
> |Object Relational Mappers  |
> |Sequelize                  |
> |Benefits of Sequelize      |
> |Conclusion                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Table of Content           |
|-------------------------  |
|[Prerequisites](#prerequisites)              |
|[SQL database basics](#sql-database-basics)        |
|[Object Relational Mappers](#object-relational-mappersorm-nodejs-approaches)  |
|[Sequelize](#what-is-sequelize)                  |
|[Benefits of Sequelize](#benefits-of-sequelize)      |
|[Conclusion](#conclusion)                 |
```
This looks good. You need not put them as a table, a simple one would be enough. Anyway it's fine.

Please note this change. I have linked the markdown headers to table of contents. By doing this, the reader will be able to jump to the respective header easily, without scrolling.

### Prerequisites
The reader is supposed to have a good understanding of JavaScript and MySQL to follow along easily.

We first set up a new npm package as shown below:

```bash
npm init -y
```

We then install Sequelize as shown below:

```bash
npm install sequelize --save
```

It is available via `npm` and `yarn`. The `--save` makes the dependency available in our `package.json` file. You'll then have to install the driver of your preferred database, for example:

```bash
npm install pg pg-hstore --save
npm install mysql2 --save
npm install mariadb --save
npm install sqlite3 --save
npm install tedious --save
```

### SQL database Basics
Let's brush our knowledge on SQL before we get to Sequelize. Structured Query Language is a language that allows us to interact with databases in performing database queries. Pronunciation differs from `SQL` to `sequel` your choice. SQL only allows execution on relational databases.

SQL enables us to perform operations abbreviated as `CRUD`; Create Read Update and Delete. To illustrate this we have two tables in our database `Employees`:

> Table `lego_people`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Table `lego_people`:
```

|name   |age    |
|-----  |----   |
|james  |34     |
|craig  |15     |
|paul   |67     |
|cynthia|55     |

> Table `lego_height`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Table `lego_height`:
```

|name   |cm     |
|-----  |----   |
|james  | 4     |
|craig  | 5     |
|paul   | 7     |
|cynthia| 5     |

> So if we want to `create` data in the `lego_people` table we:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, if we want to `create` data in the `lego_people` table we use `INSERT` query as shown below:
```

```sql
INSERT INTO lego_people(name, age)
VALUES ('Joe' ,12);
```
The `INSERT INTO` statement is used to create data in a database table. We pass in `name` and `age` as arguments to specify the properties we want to add.

> To `read` value from the `lego_people` table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To read values from the `lego_people` table, we use `SELECT` query as shown below:
```

```sql
SELECT name FROM lego_people;
```

> The `name` represents the column name in the` lego_people` table. The `SELECT` statement is used to read data from the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `name` represents the column name in the `lego_people` table.
```

> To `update` a record in the `lego_height` table by making Paul 8cm tall:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To `update` a record in the `lego_height` table by making `paul` to `8cm` tall, we use `UPDATE` query:
```

```sql
UPDATE lego_height
SET name = 'paul', height = 8;
```

We can also perform a `delete` operation from the database. For example, let's delete `paul` altogether using the following command:

```sql
DELETE FROM lego_height
WHERE name = 'paul';
```

The `WHERE` clause specifies the data to be deleted.

> If for instance, we wanted to have the records of both age and height in one table we would use a `JOIN` statement to combine both tables:

Reviewer: Here, we have different types of JOINs, so add a link differentiating all of them. And, mention that here we use only `LEFT JOIN`.

```sql
SELECT name, age FROM lego_people
LEFT JOIN lego_height USING (name);
```

This would result to this:

|name   |age   |cm    |
|-----  |----- |----- | 
|james  |34    | 4    |    
|craig  |15    | 5    |
|paul   |67    | 7    |    
|cynthia|55    | 5    |

### Object Relational Mappers(ORM) Node.js Approaches

> Before we get started with Sequelize, let's get to understand what an ORM is and some of the supported ORMs in Node.js. Object Relational Mapping is a simplified way of converting data between relational databases and objects (Primrose katena, 2020).

Reviewer: Is this `(Primrose katena, 2020)` some reference? If so, could you also add a link here.

Most times we encounter scenarios where we have to write complex SQL query statements to perform CRUD operations from a database. Worse enough, we still need to convert data from the database into an object that is compatible with our language of choice as we will see in the next chapter. It additionally simplifies the manipulation of database engines whenever the need arises. 

> So how does ORMs work, well first, choosing the right database you want to use. Then decide on the Object Relational Mapper that would work efficiently with the database and install it. For our case since we're using Node.js, we'll consider Sequelize.
> Second, we create a database model. This represents the structure of our database. Database models provide the advantage of scalability and efficiency. The structure defined in the model includes tables, database collection, and columns. We then connect our database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So how does ORMs work, well first, choosing the right database you want to use. Then decide on the Object Relational Mapper that would work efficiently with the database and install it. For our case since we're using Node.js, we'll consider Sequelize.

Second, we create a database model. This represents the structure of our database. Database models provide the advantage of scalability and efficiency. The structure defined in the model includes tables, database collection, and columns. We then connect our database.
```

The types of Object Relational Mappers with Node.js support are:
- `Sequalize` has support for PostgreSQL, MySQL, MariaDB, SQLite, and Microsoft SQL Server databases.
- `Caminte` supports a large number of databases such as MySQL Sqlite3, Riak, Postgres, CouchDB, MongoDB, Redis. 
- `Node-ORM` has support for MySQL, SQLite, and PostgreSQL.

For more on ORMs, you can check out this [documentation](https://www.npmjs.com/search?q=object%20relational%20mapper).

> ### What is Sequalize

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### What is Sequelize
```

> ### What is Sequelize

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### What is Sequelize?
```

> Sequelize is an open-source Node.js module that enables JavaScript developers to work with relational databases more easily including but not limited to MySQL and Postgres. Chances are that if you're working with relational databases already you are doing something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sequelize is an open-source Node.js module that enables JavaScript developers to work with relational databases more easily, including but not limited to MySQL and Postgres. Chances are that if you're working with relational databases already you are doing something like this:
```

```javascript
// create a database table
CREATE TABLE articles(
    id          INT AUTO_INCREMENT,
    title       NVARCHAR(100) NOT NULL,
    body        NVARCHAR(100) NOT NULL,
    submittedAt DATETIME      NOT NULL
);

//instantiate mysql
const mysql = require("mysql");
const connection = mysql.createConnection({
    host: "localhost",
    user: "root",
    password: "",
    database: "demo_schema"
});
connection.connect();

// query sql statements
const query = "SELECT `id`, `title`, `content`, `submittedAt` \
FROM 'articles' WHERE `articles`.`id` = ?";
connection.query(query, 5, function(error, article){
    console.log(article);
});
```

> First, you're writing a separate script to create tables and define associations between them, then you're embedding SQL queries in your JavaScript and using a low-level adapter to execute those queries against your database in this case we're using the MySQL node module. Whilst this code in itself isn't terrible, you'll find over time having separate scripts to create your table adds unnecessary friction, also mixing SQL and JavaScript like in this case is not sustainable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you're writing a separate script to create tables and define associations between them, then you're embedding SQL queries in your JavaScript and using a low-level adapter to execute those queries against your database.

In this case, we're using the MySQL node module. Whilst this code in itself isn't terrible, you'll find over time having separate scripts to create your table, adds unnecessary friction, also mixing SQL and JavaScript like in this case is not sustainable.
```

Reviewer: Could you explain about low-level adapter?

JavaScript does not support multiline strings very well, for instance in our case we're ending the first line of the string with a backslash. Even if it did support it, switching between JavaScript and SQL is just unpleasant. This contributes to a lot of junk code and little business logic which are not easy to maintain.

On the other hand, using sequelize you can avoid writing SQL queries altogether. Let's have a look at this code snippet:

```javascript
//Instantiate sequelize
const Sequelize = require('sequelize');

//connect db
const connection = new Sequelize("db name", "username", "password");

//define article model
const Article = connection.define("article", {
    title: Sequelize.String,
    content: Sequelize.String
});
connection.sync();
```

> First, we instantiate Sequelize and define our database connection parameters. Instead of writing a separate SQL file containing SQL code to generate tables, we define what is referred to as models. For example in our case, `article` is our model and we define two attributes; `title` and `content`. Then using the `sync()` function, Sequelize will look at all the models you've defined and then generate SQL queries that will in turn create associated tables. Then when we're ready to query the data instead of embedding the SQL we just use the Sequelize friendly API. For example in the snippet below instead of using a query, we're simply writing `findById()` and then specifying the ID of the article which is `5` in our case improving its readability.

Reviewer: Break down this para into 2 or more smaller paras.

```javascript
//Instantiate sequelize
const Sequelize = require('sequelize');

//connect db
const connection = new Sequelize("db name", "username", "password");

//define article model
const Article = connection.define("article", {
    title: Sequelize.String,
    content: Sequelize.String
});
connection.sync();

//query using sequelize API
Article.findById(5).then(function (article) {
    console.log(article);
})
```

Using Sequelize helps us have less craft, less boilerplate ultimately making your code easy to read, maintain and extend.

### Benefits of Sequelize
So to conclude this introduction we're going to touch on the benefits of Sequelize and Object Relational Mappers in general.

> - Sequelize allow us to write less  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sequelize allow us to write less code
```

- Enable us to write more consistent code
- You can mostly avoid SQL queries

> - Sequelize abstract the database engine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sequelize abstracts the database engine
```
